Title: Getting In Sync
Date: 2016-08-17 15:23
Authors: Samuel Mendoza-Jonas
Category: Petitboot
Tags: skiroot, petitboot, goodposts, realcontent, devmapper, lvm, debug

Since at least v1.0.0 Petitboot has used device-mapper snapshots to avoid
mounting block devices directly. Primarily this is so Petitboot can mount disks
and potentially perform filesystem recovery without worrying about messing it up
and corrupting a host's boot partition - all changes happen to the snapshot in
memory without affecting the actual device.

This of course gets in the way if you actually _do_ want to make changes to a
block device. Petitboot will allow certain bootloader scripts to make changes
to disks if configured (eg, grubenv updates), but if you manually make changes
you would need to know the special sequence of `dmsetup` commands to merge the
snapshots back to disk. This is particulary annoying if you're trying to copy
logs to a USB device!

Depending on how recent a version of Petitboot you're running, there are two
ways of making sure your changes persist:

## Before v1.2.2

If you really need to save changes from within Petitboot, the most
straightforward way is to disable snapshots. Drop to the shell and enter
```
nvram --update-config petitboot,snapshots?=false
reboot
```

Once you have rebooted you can remount the device as read-write and
modify it as normal.

## After v1.2.2

To make this easier while keeping the benefit of snapshots, v1.2.2 introduces
a new user-event that will merge snapshots on demand. For example:
```
mount -o remount,rw /var/petitboot/mnt/dev/sda2
cp /var/log/messages /var/petitboot/mnt/dev/sda2/
pb-event sync@sda2
```

After calling `pb-event sync@yourdevice`, Petitboot will remount the device back to
read-only and merge the current snapshot differences back to disk. You can also
run `pb-event sync@all` to sync all existing snapshots if desired.