Title: Work Experience At Ozlabs
Authors: Callum Scarvell
Date: 2016-02-25
Category: Work Experience
Tags: Work Experience, Ozlabs

As a recent year twelve graduate my knowledge of computer science was very limited and my ability to write working programs was all but none. So you can imagine my excitement when I heard of an opening for work experience with IBM's internationally renowned Ozlabs team, or as I knew them the _Linux Gods_. My first day of working at Ozlabs I learnt more about programing then in six years of secondary education. I met most of the Ozlabs team and made connections that will certainly help with my pursuit of a career in IT. Because in business its who you know more than what you know, and now I know the guys at Ozlabs I know how to write code and run it on my own Linux Distro. And on top of all the extremely valuable knowledge I am on a first name basis with the _Linux Gods_ at the LTC.

After my first week at Ozlabs I cloned this blog from Octopress and reformatted it for pelican static site generator.For those who don't know Octopress is a ruby based static site generator so converting the embedded ruby gems to pelicans python code was no easy task for this newbie. Luckily I had a team of some of the best software developers in the world to help and teach me their ways. After we sorted the change from ruby to python and I was able to understand both languages, I presented my work to the team. They then decided to throw me a curve ball as they did not like any of pelicans default themes, instead they wanted the original Octopress theme on the new blog. This is how I learnt GitHub is my bestest friend, because some kind soul had already converted the ruby theme into python and it ran perfectly!

Now it was a simple task of re-formatting the ruby-gem text files into markdown which is pelican compatible(which is why we chose pelican in the first place). So now we had a working pelican blog on the Octopress theme, one issue it was very annoying to navigate. Using my newly learned skills and understanding of python I inserted tags, categories, web-links, navigation bar and I started learning how to code C. And it all worked fine! That was what I a newbie could accomplish in one week. I still have two more weeks left here and I have plenty of really interesting work left to do. This has been one of the greatest learning experiences of my life and I would do it again if I could! So if you are looking for experience in it or software development look no further because you could be learning to code from the people who wrote the language itself. The _Linux Gods_.
