Title: Lifecycle of a kernel task
Date: 2024-03-21 08:00:00
Authors: Benjamin Gray
Category: Development
Tags: linux

## Introduction

CPU cores are limited in number. Right now my computer tells me it's running
around 500 processes, and I definitely do not have that many cores. The
operating system's ability to virtualise work as independent 'executable units'
and distribute them across the limited CPU pool is one of the foundations of
modern computing.

The Linux kernel calls these virtual execution units _tasks_[^task]. Each task
encapsulates all the information the kernel needs to swap it in and out of
running on a CPU core. This includes register state, memory mappings, open
files, and any other resource that needs to be tied to a particular task. Nearly
every work item in the kernel, including kernel background jobs and userspace
processes, is handled by this unified task concept. The kernel uses a scheduler
to determine when and where to run tasks according to some parameters, such as
maximising throughput, minimising latency, or whatever other characteristics the
user desires.

[^task]: Read more on tasks in [my previous post]({filename}2023-11-28-context-switching-sprs-on-powerpc.md)

In this article, we'll dive into the lifecycle of a task in the kernel. This is
a PowerPC blog, so any architecture specific (often shortened to 'arch')
references are referring to PowerPC. To make the most out of this you should
also have a copy of the kernel source open alongside you, to get a sense of what
else is happening in the locations we discuss below. This article hyper-focuses
on specific details of setting up tasks, leaving out a lot of possibly related
content. Call stacks are provided to help orient yourself in many cases.


## Booting

The kernel starts up with no concept of tasks, it just runs from the location
the bootloader started it (the `__start` function for PowerPC). The first idea
of a task takes root in `early_setup()` where we initialise the PACA (I asked,
but what this stands for is unclear). The PACA is used to hold a lot of core
per-cpu information, such as the CPU index (for generic per-cpu variables) and a
pointer to the active task.

```c
__start()  // ASM implementation, defined in head_64.S
  __start_initialization_multiplatform()
    __after_prom_start()
      start_here_multiplatform()
        early_setup()   // switched to C here, defined in setup_64.c
          initialise_paca()
            new_paca->__current = &init_task;
```

We use the PACA to (among other things) hold a reference to the active task. The
task we start with is the special `init_task`. To avoid ambiguity with the
userspace init task we see later, I'll refer to `init_task` as the _boot task_
from here onwards. This boot task is a statically defined instance of a
`task_struct` that is the root of all future tasks. Its resources are likewise
statically defined, typically named following the pattern `init_*`. We aren't
taking advantage of the context switching capability of tasks this early in
boot, we just need to look like we're a task for any initialisation code that
cares. For now we continue to work as a single CPU core with a single task.

We continue on and reach `start_kernel()`, the generic entry point of the kernel
once any arch specific bootstrapping is sufficiently complete. One of the first
things we call here is `setup_arch()`, which continues any initialisation that
still needs to occur. This is where we call `smp_setup_pacas()` to allocate a
PACA for each CPU; these all get the boot task as well (all referencing the same
`init_task` structure, not copies of it). Eventually they will be given their
own independent tasks, but during most of boot we don't do anything on them so
it doesn't matter for now.

The next point of interest back in `start_kernel()` is `fork_init()`. Here we
create a `task_struct` allocator to serve any task creation requests. We also
limit the number of tasks here, dynamically picking the limit based on the
available memory, page size, and a fixed upper bound.

```c
void __init fork_init(void) {
	// ...
	/* create a slab on which task_structs can be allocated */
	task_struct_whitelist(&useroffset, &usersize);
	task_struct_cachep = kmem_cache_create_usercopy("task_struct",
			arch_task_struct_size, align,
			SLAB_PANIC|SLAB_ACCOUNT,
			useroffset, usersize, NULL);
	// ...
}
```

At the end of `start_kernel()` we reach `rest_init()` (as in 'do the rest of the
init'). In here we create our first two dynamically allocated tasks: the init
task (not to be confused with `init_task`, which we are calling the boot task),
and the kthreadd task (with the double 'd'). The init task is (eventually) the
userspace init process. We create it first to get the PID value 1, which is
relied on by a number of things in the kernel and in userspace[^pid1]. The
kthreadd task provides an asynchronous creation mechanism for kthreads: callers
append their thread parameters to a dedicated list, and the kthreadd task spawns
any entries on the list whenever it gets scheduled. Creating these tasks
automatically puts them on the scheduler run queue, and they might even start
automatically with preemption.

[^pid1]: One example of the init task being special is that the kernel will not
    allow its process to be killed. It must always have at least one thread.

```c
// init/main.c

noinline void __ref __noreturn rest_init(void)
{
	struct task_struct *tsk;
	int pid;

	rcu_scheduler_starting();
	/*
	 * We need to spawn init first so that it obtains pid 1, however
	 * the init task will end up wanting to create kthreads, which, if
	 * we schedule it before we create kthreadd, will OOPS.
	 */
	pid = user_mode_thread(kernel_init, NULL, CLONE_FS);
	/*
	 * Pin init on the boot CPU. Task migration is not properly working
	 * until sched_init_smp() has been run. It will set the allowed
	 * CPUs for init to the non isolated CPUs.
	 */
	rcu_read_lock();
	tsk = find_task_by_pid_ns(pid, &init_pid_ns);
	tsk->flags |= PF_NO_SETAFFINITY;
	set_cpus_allowed_ptr(tsk, cpumask_of(smp_processor_id()));
	rcu_read_unlock();

	numa_default_policy();
	pid = kernel_thread(kthreadd, NULL, NULL, CLONE_FS | CLONE_FILES);
	rcu_read_lock();
	kthreadd_task = find_task_by_pid_ns(pid, &init_pid_ns);
	rcu_read_unlock();

	/*
	 * Enable might_sleep() and smp_processor_id() checks.
	 * They cannot be enabled earlier because with CONFIG_PREEMPTION=y
	 * kernel_thread() would trigger might_sleep() splats. With
	 * CONFIG_PREEMPT_VOLUNTARY=y the init task might have scheduled
	 * already, but it's stuck on the kthreadd_done completion.
	 */
	system_state = SYSTEM_SCHEDULING;

	complete(&kthreadd_done);

	/*
	 * The boot idle thread must execute schedule()
	 * at least once to get things moving:
	 */
	schedule_preempt_disabled();
	/* Call into cpu_idle with preempt disabled */
	cpu_startup_entry(CPUHP_ONLINE);
}

```

After this, the boot task calls `cpu_startup_entry()`, which transforms it into
the idle task for the boot CPU and enters the idle loop. We're now almost fully
task driven, and our journey picks back up inside of the init task.

Bonus tip: when looking at the kernel boot console, you can tell what print
actions are performed by the boot task vs the init task. The `init_task` has PID
0, so lines start with `T0`. The init task has PID 1, so appears as `T1`.

```text
[    0.039772][    T0] printk: legacy console [hvc0] enabled
...
[   28.272167][    T1] Run /init as init process
```


## The init task

When we created the init task, we set the entry point to be the `kernel_init()`
function. Execution simply begins from here[^begin] once it gets woken up for
the first time. The very first thing we do is wait[^wait] for the kthreadd task
to be created: if we were to try and create a kthread before this, when the
kthread creation mechanism tries to wake up the kthreadd task it would be using
an uninitialised pointer, causing an oops. To prevent this, the init task waits
on a completion object that the boot task marks completed after creating
kthreadd. We could technically avoid this synchronization altogether just by
creating kthreadd first, but then the init task wouldn't have PID 1.

[^begin]: Well, it actually begins at a small assembly shim, but close enough
    for now.

[^wait]: The wait mechanism itself is an interesting example of interacting with
the scheduler. Starting with a common `struct completion` object, the waiting
task registers itself as awaiting the object to complete. Specifically, it adds
its task handle to a queue on the completion object. It then loops calling
`schedule()`, yielding itself to other tasks, until the completion object is
flagged as done. Somewhere else another task marks the completion object as
completed. As part of this, the task marking the completion tries to wake up any
task that has registered itself as waiting earlier.

The rest of the init task wraps up the initialisation stage as a whole. Mostly
it moves the system into the 'running' state after freeing any memory marked as
for initialisation only (set by `__init` annotations). Once fully initialised
and running, the init task attempts to execute the userspace init program.

```c
	if (ramdisk_execute_command) {
		ret = run_init_process(ramdisk_execute_command);
		if (!ret)
			return 0;
		pr_err("Failed to execute %s (error %d)\n",
		       ramdisk_execute_command, ret);
	}

	if (execute_command) {
		ret = run_init_process(execute_command);
		if (!ret)
			return 0;
		panic("Requested init %s failed (error %d).",
		      execute_command, ret);
	}

	if (CONFIG_DEFAULT_INIT[0] != '\0') {
		ret = run_init_process(CONFIG_DEFAULT_INIT);
		if (ret)
			pr_err("Default init %s failed (error %d)\n",
			       CONFIG_DEFAULT_INIT, ret);
		else
			return 0;
	}

	if (!try_to_run_init_process("/sbin/init") ||
	    !try_to_run_init_process("/etc/init") ||
	    !try_to_run_init_process("/bin/init") ||
	    !try_to_run_init_process("/bin/sh"))
		return 0;

	panic("No working init found.  Try passing init= option to kernel. "
	      "See Linux Documentation/admin-guide/init.rst for guidance.");
```

What file the init process is loaded from is determined by a combination of the
system's filesystem, kernel boot arguments, and some default fallbacks. The
locations it will attempt, in order, are:

1. Ramdisk file set by `rdinit=` boot command line parameter, with default path
   `/init`. An initcall run earlier searches the boot arguments for `rdinit` and
   initialises `ramdisk_execute_command` with it. If the ramdisk does not
   contain the requested file, then the kernel will attempt to automatically
   mount the root device and use it for the subsequent checks.
2. File set by `init=` boot command line parameter. Like with `rdinit`, the
   `execute_command` variable is initialised by an early initcall looking for
   `init` in the boot arguments.
3. `/sbin/init`
4. `/etc/init`
5. `/bin/init`
6. `/bin/sh`

Should none of these work, the kernel just panics. Which seems fair.


## Aside: secondary processors

Until now we've focused on the boot CPU. While the utility of a task still
applies to a uniprocessor system (perhaps even more so than one with hardware
parallelism), a nice benefit of encapsulating all the execution state into a
data structure is the ability to load the task onto any other compatible
processor on the system. But before we can start scheduling on other CPU cores,
we need to bring them online and initialise them to a state ready for the
scheduler.

On the pSeries platform, the secondary CPUs are held by the firmware until
explicitly released by the guest. Early in boot, the boot CPU (not task! We
don't have tasks yet) will iterate the list of held secondary processors and
release them one by one to the `__secondary_hold` function. As each starts
executing `__secondary_hold`, it writes a value to the
`__secondary_hold_acknowledge` variable that the boot CPU is watching. The
secondary processor then immediately starts spinning on
`__secondary_hold_spinloop`, waiting for it to become non-zero, while the boot
CPU moves on to the the next processor.

```c
// Boot CPU releasing the coprocessors from firmware

__start()
  __start_initialization_multiplatform()
    __boot_from_prom()
      prom_init()    // switched to C here
        prom_hold_cpus()
          // secondary_hold is alias for __secondary_hold assembly function
          call_prom("start-cpu", ..., secondary_hold, ...);  // on each coprocessor
```

Once every coprocessor is confirmed to be spinning on
`__secondary_hold_spinloop`, the boot CPU continues on with its boot sequence.
Once we reach `setup_arch()` as above, the boot task invokes
`smp_release_cpus()` early in `start_kernel()`, which writes the desired entry
point address of the coprocessors to `__secondary_hold_spinloop`. All the
spinning coprocessors now see this value, and jump to it. This function,
`generic_secondary_smp_init()`, will set up the coprocessor's PACA value,
perform some machine specific initialisation if `cur_cpu_spec->cpu_restore` is
set,[^restore] atomically decrement a `spinning_secondaries` variable, and start
spinning once again until further notice. This time it is waiting on the PACA
field `cpu_start`, so we can start coprocessors individually.

[^restore]: The `cur_cpu_spec->cpu_restore` machine specific initialisation is
    based on the machine that got selected in
    `arch/powerpc/kernel/cpu_specs_book3s_64.h`. This is where the
    `__restore_cpu_*` family of functions might be called, which mostly
    initialise certain SPRs to sane values.

We leave the coprocessors here for a while, until the init task calls
`kernel_init_freeable()`. This function is used for any initialisation required
_after_ kthreads are running, but _before_ all the `__init` sections are
dropped. The setup relevant to coprocessors is the call to `smp_init()`. Here we
fork the current task (the init task) once for each coprocessor with
`idle_threads_init()`. We then call `bringup_nonboot_cpus()` to make each
coprocessor start scheduling.

The exact code paths here are both deep and indirect, so here's the interesting
part of the call tree for the pSeries platform to help guide you through the
code.

```c
// In the init task

smp_init()
  idle_threads_init()     // create idle task for each coprocessor
  bringup_nonboot_cpus()  // make each coprocessor enter the idle loop
    cpuhp_bringup_mask()
      cpu_up()
        _cpu_up()
          cpuhp_up_callbacks()  // invokes the CPUHP_BRINGUP_CPU .startup.single function
            bringup_cpu()
              __cpu_up()
                cpu_idle_thread_init()  // sets CPU's task in PACA to its idle task
                smp_ops->prepare_cpu()  // on pSeries inits XIVE if in use
                smp_ops->kick_cpu()     // indirect call to smp_pSeries_kick_cpu()
                  smp_pSeries_kick_cpu()
                    paca_ptrs[nr]->cpu_start = 1  // the coprocessor was spinning on this value
```

Interestingly, the entry point declared when cloning the init task for the
coprocessors is never used. This is because the coprocessors never get woken up
from the hand-crafted init state the way new tasks normally would. Instead they
are already executing a code path, and so when they next yield they will just
clobber the entry point and other registers with their actually running task
state.


## Transitioning the init task to userspace

The last remaining job of the kernel side of the init task is to actually load
in and execute the selected userspace program. It's not like we can just call
the userspace entry point though: we need to be a little creative here.

As alluded to above, when we create tasks with `clone_thread()`, it doesn't set
the provided entry point directly: it instead sets a small shim that is actually
used when the new task eventually gets woken up. The particular shim it uses is
determined by whether the task is a kthread or not.

Both kinds of shim expect the requested entry point to be passed via a specific
non-volatile register and, in the case of a kthread, basically just invokes it
after some minor bookkeeping. A kthread should never return directly, so it
traps if this happens.

```asm
_GLOBAL(start_kernel_thread)
	bl	CFUNC(schedule_tail)
	mtctr	r14
	mr	r3,r15
#ifdef CONFIG_PPC64_ELF_ABI_V2
	mr	r12,r14
#endif
	bctrl
	/*
	 * This must not return. We actually want to BUG here, not WARN,
	 * because BUG will exit the process which is what the kernel thread
	 * should have done, which may give some hope of continuing.
	 */
100:	trap
	EMIT_BUG_ENTRY 100b,__FILE__,__LINE__,0
```

But the init task isn't a kthread. We passed a kernel entrypoint to
`copy_thread()` but did not set the kthread flag, so `copy_thread()` inferred
that this means the task will eventually run in userspace. This makes it use the
`ret_from_kernel_user_thread()` shim.

```asm
_GLOBAL(ret_from_kernel_user_thread)
	bl	CFUNC(schedule_tail)
	mtctr	r14
	mr	r3,r15
#ifdef CONFIG_PPC64_ELF_ABI_V2
	mr	r12,r14
#endif
	bctrl
	li	r3,0
	/*
	 * It does not matter whether this returns via the scv or sc path
	 * because it returns as execve() and therefore has no calling ABI
	 * (i.e., it sets registers according to the exec()ed entry point).
	 */
	b	.Lsyscall_exit
```

We start off identically to a kthread, except here we expect the task to return.
This is the key: when the init task wants to transition to userspace, it sets up
the stack frame as if we were serving a syscall. It then returns, which runs the
syscall exit procedure that culminates in an `rfid` to userspace.

The actual setting up of the syscall frame is handled by the
`(try_)run_init_process()` function. The interesting call path goes like

```c
run_init_process()
  kernel_execve()
    bprm_execve()
      exec_binprm()
        search_binary_handler()
          list_for_each_entry(fmt, &formats, lh)
            retval = fmt->load_binary(bprm);
```

The outer few calls mainly handle checking prerequisites and bookkeeping. The
`exec_binrpm()` call also handles shebang redirection, allowing up to 5 levels
of interpreter. At each level it invokes `search_binary_handler()`, which
attempts to find a handler for the program file's format. Contrary to the name,
the searcher will also immediately try to load the file if it finds an
appropriate handler. It's this call to `load_binary` (dispatched to whatever
handler was found) that sets up our userspace execution context, including the
syscall return state.

All that's left to do here is return 0 all the way up the chain, which you'll
see results in the init task returning to the shim that performs the syscall
return sequence to userspace. The init task is now fully userspace.


## Creating other tasks

It feels like we've spent a lot of time discussing the init task. What about all
the other tasks?

It turns out that the creation of the init task is very similar to any other
task. All tasks are clones of the task that created them (except the statically
defined `init_task`). Note 'clone' is being used in a loose sense here: it's not
an exact image of the parent. There's a configuration parameter that determines
which components are shared, and which are made into independent copies. The
implementation may also just decide to change some things that don't make sense
to duplicate, such as the task ID to distinguish it from the parent.

As we saw earlier, kthreads are created indirectly through a global list and
kthreadd daemon task that does the actual cloning. This has two benefits:
allowing asynchronous task creation from atomic contexts, and ensuring all
kthreads inherit a 'clean' task context, instead of whatever was active at the
time.

Userspace task creation, beyond the init task, is driven by the userspace
process invoking the `fork()` and `clone()` family of syscalls. Both of these
are light wrappers over the `kernel_clone()` function, which we used earlier for
the creation of the init task and kthreadd.

When a task runs a syscall in the `exec()` family, it doesn't create a new task.
It instead hits the same code path as when we tried to run the userspace init
program, where it loads in the context as defined by the program file into the
current task and returns from the syscall (legitimately this time).


## Context switching

The last piece of the puzzle (as far as this article will look at!) is how tasks
are switched in and out, and some of the rules around when it can and can't
happen. Once the init and kthreadd tasks are created, we call
`cpu_startup_entry(CPUHP_ONLINE)`. Any coprocessors have also been released to
call this by now too. Their tasks are repurposed to 'idle tasks', which serve to
run when no other tasks are available to run. They will spin on a check for
pending work, entering an idle state each loop until they see pending tasks to
run. They then call `__schedule()` in a loop (also conditional on pending tasks
existing), and then return back to the idle loop once everything in the moment
is handled.

The `__schedule()` function is the main guts of the scheduler, which until now
has seemed like some nebulous controller that's governing when and where our
tasks run. In reality it isn't one isolated part of the system, but a function
that a task calls when it decides to yield to any other waiting tasks. It starts
by deciding which pending task should run (a whole can of worms right there),
and then executing `context_switch()` if it changes from the current task.
`context_switch()` is the point where the `current` task starts to change.
Specifically, you can trace the changing of `current` (i.e., the PACA being
updated with a new task pointer) to the following path

```c
context_switch()
  switch_to()
    __switch_to()
      _switch()
        do_switch_64
          std	r6,PACACURRENT(r13)
```

One interesting consequence of tasks calling `context_switch()` is that the
previous task is 'suspended'[^2] right where it saves its registers and puts in
the new task's values. When it is woken up again at some point in the future it
resumes right where it left off. So when you are reading the `__switch_to()`
implementation, you are actually looking at two different tasks in the same
function.

[^2]: Don't forget that the entire concept of tasks is made up by the kernel:
    from the hardware's point of view we haven't done anything interesting, just
    changed some registers.

But it gets even weirder: while tasks that put themselves to sleep here wake up
inside of `_switch()`, new tasks being woken up for the first time start at a
completely different location! So not only is the task changing, the `_switch()`
call might not even return back to `__switch_to()`!


## Conclusion

And there you have it, everything<sup>_[citation needed]_</sup> you could ever
need to know when getting started with tasks. Will you need to know this
specifically? Hard to say. But hopefully it at least provides some useful
pointers for understanding the execution model of the kernel.


## Questions

The following are some questions you might have (read: I had).

### Do we change the task struct when serving a syscall?

No, the task struct stays the same. The task struct declares it represents a
userspace task, but it stays as the active task when serving syscalls or similar
actions on behalf of its userspace execution.

Thanks to address space quadrants we don't even need to change the active memory
mapping: upon entry to the kernel we automatically start using the PID 0
mapping.


### Where does a task get allocated a PID?

Software PIDs are allocated when spawning a new process. However, if the process
shares memory mappings with another (such as threads can), it may not be
allocated a new hardware PID. Referring to the PID used for virtual memory
translations, the hardware PID is actually a property of the memory mapping
struct (`mm_struct`). You can find a hardware PID being allocated when a new
`mm_struct` is created, which may or may not occur depending on the task clone
parameters.


### How can the fork and exec syscalls be hooked into for arch specific handling?

Fork (and clone) will always invoke `copy_thread()`. The exec call will invoke
`start_thread()` when loading a binary file. Any other kind of file (script,
binfmt-misc) will eventually require some form of binary file to load/bootstrap
it, so `start_thread()` should work for your purposes. You can also use
`arch_setup_new_exec()` for a cleaner hook into exec.

The task context of the calls is fairly predictable: `current` in
`copy_thread()` refers to the parent because we are still in the middle of
copying it. For `start_thread()`, `current` refers to the task that is going to
be the new program because it is just configuring itself.


### Where do exceptions/interrupts fit in?

When a hardware interrupt triggers it just stops whatever it was doing and dumps
us at the corresponding exception handler. Our `current` value still points to
whatever task is active (restoring the PACA is done very early). If we were in
userspace (MSR<sub>PR</sub> was 1) we consider ourselves to be in 'process
context'. This is, in some sense, the default state in the kernel. We are able
to sleep (i.e., invoke the scheduler and swap ourselves out), take locks, and
generally do anything you might like to do in the kernel. This is in contrast
to 'atomic context', where certain parts of the kernel expect to be executed
without interruption or sleeping.

However, we are a bit more restricted if we arrived at an interrupt from
supervisor mode. For example, we don't know if we interrupted an atomic context,
so we can't safely do anything that might cause sleep. This is why in some
interrupt handlers like `do_program_check()` we have to check `user_mode(regs)`
before we can read a userspace instruction[^1].

[^1]: The issue with reading a userspace instruction is that the page access may
    require the page be faulted in, which can sleep. There is a mechanism to
    disable the page fault handler specifically, but then we might not be able
    to read the instruction.
